in this video let us learn how can be optimised
the factorial recursion Code with Tail Recursion
Let us take this factorial
code here the base case is if n less than
or equal to one then return one and the Recursive
call is return n into fact of n minus one
But this is not a tail Recursive call because the
statement n  into fact of n minus one execution depends
on the return value of next to recursive call
Fact of n minus one So it is not a
tail Recursive call
Let us see how these Recursive calls will execute
If we take n  as five the Recursive calls will
be fact of five equal to five
Into fact of four Now fact Of four will expand
so it will be five into four into fact of
three and next fact of three will expand as three
into fact of two
So we will get five into four into three into
two Into fact of one next fact of one
will expand and we will get five Into four into
three into two into one
Now multiplication will take place and first two into one
will be calculated and it will become five into four
into three into two
Next three into two will be calculated and it will
become five into four into six
And next four into six will be calculated and we
will get five into 24
And finally we will get the result 120
So for calculating factorial of five this Recursive
call will consume a lot of memory in the stack
section
So what happens if we are calculating factorial of
1000 Its Recursive calls will expand from fact of 1000
like this and the result will be computed while the
recursive calls are returned
So if we assume every stack call take one unit
of memory it will take a huge amount of memory
that is in order of n  in the stacks section
So it is not an efficient approach in terms of
computation
So what will be the better solution for this If
we can write factorial function as tail Recursion
it will be optimised by the compiler and it will
work like a simple looping statement
That way we can optimise a lot of memory usage
for that we need to convert this factorial function
using tail recursion in this function
What is the dependency here The statement n  into fact
of n minus
One execution depends on return value of next recursive
call fact of n minus one
We need to eliminate that
For that what we can do is instead of computing multiplication
here we can send multiplication as one more argument
That argument will accumulate the factorial result in each
Recursive call
So led us add another parameter in the function int ans
and pass n  into ans as an argument to the
next recursive call
The final result will be accumulated in this ans
variable so when n  becomes zero we can return the final
result
That is the value of ans
Now there is no dependency in the last recursive
call and it is the last statement executed by the
function
So it is a tail Recursive call Now let us
see how this tail recursive call Execution differs from
the previous one
If we take n  as five and initially we will
pass ans as one so fact of five coma one
becomes n minus one that is four and n  into
ans
That is five
Next factor four coma five will be executed here
Factor four coma five becomes n minus 1 3 and four
into 5
Next fact of three comma 20 will be executed
And here fact of three comma 20 becomes three minus
1 2 and three into
20 60
Next fact of two comma 60 will be executed and
here it becomes two minus 1 1 and two into
60 120
And finally fact of one coma 120 becomes one
minus 1 0 and one Into 120 120
And when n value reach zero we will return the
result
So the result of fact Of five is 120
Since there is no dependency in this tail recursive
call the execution becomes much simpler and efficient compared to
the previous function
And since it is a tail recursive call the
compiler will optimise the recursive called before the execution
The recursive call argument will be converted as simple
statements so n minus one will be replaced by N
equal to n  minus one and n  into ans will
be replaced by ans equel to n  Into
ans
And now the compiler will add the label before the
code block and invoke it using the Goto statement
Now this tail Recursive Call will work as a simple
looping statement so it will only take a constant amount
of memory that is order of one
This tail Recursive approach is much efficient and will save
a huge amount of memory in the stacks section
So this is the recent Why tail recursion is
considered more efficient than other type of recursions.